Report
Electrophysiological Correlates of Semantic
Dissimilarity Reﬂect the Comprehension of Natural,Narrative Speech
Highlights
dEEG reﬂects semantic processing of continuous natural
speech
dMapping function of semantic features to neural responseshares traits with the N400
dComputational language models capture neural-relatedmeasures of semantic dissimilarity
dIndex of semantic processing is sensitive to attention andspeech intelligibilityAuthors
Michael P. Broderick,Andrew J. Anderson,Giovanni M. Di Liberto,Michael J. Crosse, Edmund C. Lalor
Correspondence
brodermi@tcd.ie (M.P.B.),
edmund_lalor@urmc.rochester.edu(E.C.L.)
In Brief
Electrophysiological studies eliciting
semantic-related neural activity typicallyinvolve paradigms using incongruouswords within specially constructedsentences. Broderick et al. usecomputational language modeling andlinear regression to successfully index thesemantic processing of continuous,natural speech using EEG.
Broderick et al., 2018, Current Biology 28, 803–809
March 5, 2018 ª2018 Elsevier Ltd.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.01.080

Current Biology
Report
Electrophysiological Correlates of Semantic
Dissimilarity Reﬂect the Comprehensionof Natural, Narrative Speech
Michael P. Broderick,1,6,*Andrew J. Anderson,2Giovanni M. Di Liberto,1,3,4Michael J. Crosse,1,5and Edmund C. Lalor1,2,*
1School of Engineering, Trinity Centre for Bioengineering, and Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College Dublin, College Green,
Dublin 2, Ireland
2Department of Biomedical Engineering, Department of Neuroscience, and Del Monte Institute for Neuroscience, University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY 14627, USA
3Laboratoire des Syste `mes Perceptifs, CNRS, 29 Rue d’Ulm, Paris 75005, France
4D/C19epartement d’Etudes Cognitives, ENS, PSL Research University, 60 Rue Mazarine, Paris 75006, France
5Department of Pediatrics and Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: brodermi@tcd.ie (M.P.B.), edmund_lalor@urmc.rochester.edu (E.C.L.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.01.080
SUMMARY
People routinely hear and understand speech at
rates of 120–200 words per minute [ 1, 2]. Thus,
speech comprehension must involve rapid, onlineneural mechanisms that process words’ meaningsin an approximately time-locked fashion. However,
electrophysiological evidence for such time-locked
processing has been lacking for continuous speech.Although valuable insights into semantic processinghave been provided by the ‘‘N400 component’’ of theevent-related potential [ 3–6], this literature has been
dominated by paradigms using incongruous wordswithin specially constructed sentences, with lessemphasis on natural, narrative speech comprehen-
sion. Building on the discovery that cortical activity
‘‘tracks’’ the dynamics of running speech [ 7–9] and
psycholinguistic work demonstrating [ 10–12 ] and
modeling [ 13–15 ] how context impacts on word pro-
cessing, we describe a new approach for deriving anelectrophysiological correlate of natural speechcomprehension. We used a computational model[16] to quantify the meaning carried by words based
on how semantically dissimilar they were to their pre-
ceding context and then regressed this measureagainst electroencephalographic (EEG) data re-corded from subjects as they listened to narrativespeech. This produced a prominent negativity at atime lag of 200–600 ms on centro-parietal EEG chan-nels, characteristics common to the N400. Applyingthis approach to EEG datasets involving time-
reversed speech, cocktail party attention, and
audiovisual speech-in-noise demonstrated that thisresponse was very sensitive to whether or notsubjects understood the speech they heard. Theseﬁndings demonstrate that, when successfully com-prehending natural speech, the human brain re-
sponds to the contextual semantic content of each
word in a relatively time-locked fashion.
RESULTS
Electroencephalographic (EEG) data were recorded from sub-
jects as they listened to narrative speech in the form of audio-book recordings. Importantly, and as detailed below, almost allof the data we present were acquired as part of previously pub-
lished studies and not with the goal of studying semantic pro-
cessing. To relate the neural data to the semantic processingof this speech, we ﬁrst wished to parameterize the speech stimuli
such that individual words were quantiﬁed according to their se-
mantic context. There are many ways to do this. Inspired by thebrain’s sensitivity to incongruous new words (as seen in the N400
[3–6]), we chose to do it based on quantifying how ‘‘semantically
dissimilar’’ each new word was compared to its immediately pre-ceding context. This idea of semantic distance has previouslybeen used in studies of reading-time effects [ 15], reading
comprehension [ 17], and brain imaging of speech processing
[17]. Our speciﬁc approach was based on the well-known
word2vec model [ 16], whereby each word in a speech stimulus
is converted to a high-dimensional vector (in our case 400 di-
mensions, which was a somewhat arbitrary choice; see STAR
Methods ). The idea is that words that share common contexts
(i.e., co-occur) in a very large corpus of text are converted to vec-
tors that are located in close proximity to one another in this high-dimensional space. As such, although it is more a measure of
local word context and not a direct measure of semantics per
se, the vector associated with each word can be used as a proxyfor the word’s meaning. We then deﬁned the ‘‘semantic dissim-ilarity’’ of each speciﬁc content word by comparing (via a Pear-
son’s correlation) its 400-dimensional vector with the average
of the vectors corresponding to all the preceding words inthat particular sentence—word combination by averaging has
proved practically effective in previous research [ 18, 19 ]—and
then subtracting that correlation from 1. Where a speciﬁc word
Current Biology 28, 803–809, March 5, 2018 ª2018 Elsevier Ltd. 803
was the ﬁrst word in a sentence, we compared it to the average
of all word vectors in the previous sentence and again subtractedthe correlation from 1. This produced a single semantic dissimi-
larity measure for each word that acts as a representation of the
meaning added to a sentence by that word (technically, thiscould take any value between 0 and 2, but it tended to be in
the range 0.53–1.06). We then created a vector at the same sam-
pling rate as our EEG data (128 Hz), which consisted of time-aligned impulses at the onset of each word that were scaled ac-
cording to the value of that word’s semantic dissimilarity. Then,
by linearly regressing the low-frequency (1–8 Hz) EEG againstthis vector, we derived a so-called temporal response function(TRF) [ 20] that describes how these ﬂuctuations in semantic
dissimilarity across consecutive words impact upon the neural
activity at various time lags (see Figure 1 ).
A Neural Correlate of Semantic Dissimilarity in Natural
SpeechA TRF averaged over 19 subjects who each listened to /C2460 min
of an audiobook is shown in Figures 2 A and 2B. A prominent
negativity is apparent over midline parietal scalp at time lagsbetween 200 and 500 ms ( Figure 2 A). Over this time range,
this negativity was signiﬁcantly less than zero across subjects
at several parietal scalp electrode sites ( Figure 2 B; running
one-tailed t test, p < 0.05, false discovery rate [FDR] corrected).To conﬁrm that this negativity was related to the semantic con-
tent of the speech and not just the stimulus acoustics, we
repeated the analysis using another dataset from ten subjectswho listened to the same audiobook, but in a time-reversed
fashion [ 21]. Carrying out the same steps as before (while tak-
ing into account the time-reversed nature of the stimuli) pro-duced TRF responses that showed no evidence of the promi-
nent, late negativity ( Figures 2 A and 2B; running one-tailed
t test, p > 0.05, FDR corrected). The presence and absence
of this negativity for forward and time-reversed speech, respec-
tively, was evident for several individual subjects who under-took both experiments ( Figure 2 C). These results demonstrate
that electrophysiological responses to natural speech, in the
form of a late, parietal negativity, reﬂect the semantic dissimi-larity of individual words to their preceding context in a rela-
tively tightly time-locked fashion.
The TRF analysis is based on a linear regression between the
stimulus feature (i.e., semantic dissimilarity) and the EEGresponse. We wished to determine how reasonable this linear
assumption was or whether, in fact, our TRF negativity was being
driven primarily by occasional ‘‘incongruent’’ words with largesemantic dissimilarity values. To do this, we divided the seman-
tic dissimilarity impulses into four quartiles based on their magni-
tude. We then created four separate regressors correspondingto each of these subsets of impulses, where the impulses within
each subset were rescaled to have unit height. The amplitude of
the late negativity in the TRFs for these four quartiles showed amonotonic increase with measure of semantic dissimilarity
(Figure S1 ).
Neural Signatures of Semantic Dissimilarity Depend on
Intelligibility
The experiments above involved either completely intelligible or
completely unintelligible stimuli. To assess how sensitive our se-mantic dissimilarity TRF might be to gradations of intelligibility,
we reanalyzed data from another experiment involving speech-
in-noise [ 22]. Speciﬁcally, we analyzed EEG data from 21
Figure 1. Regularized Regression Analysis for Estimating an Electrophysiological Correlate of Semantic Dissimilarity to Natural Speech
Content words from an audiobook are converted to 400-dimensional vectors using the word2vec algorithm [ 20] (bottom left). The semantic similarity of each word
to its preceding context is then deﬁned by comparing (via a Pearson’s correlation) its 400-dimensional vector with the average of the vectors of all th e preceding
words in the corresponding sentence. And the ‘‘semantic dissimilarity’’ of the word is quantiﬁed as 1 minus this correlation (bottom middle left). A vector at the
same sampling rate as the recorded neural data is then created that consists of time-aligned impulses at the onset of each word that are scaled accordin g to the
value of that word’s semantic dissimilarity. The ongoing EEG data are then regressed against this vector to obtain a so-called temporal response func tion (TRF;
right) that describes via beta weights how ﬂuctuations in semantic dissimilarity across words impact upon the EEG at various time lags [ 21].
804 Current Biology 28, 803–809, March 5, 2018
subjects who listened to two repetitions each of ﬁfteen 60 s
segments of continuous audio speech which were always mixedwith spectrally matched stationary noise at a signal-to-noise ra-
tio of/C09 dB. Based on the well-known fact that visual speech en-
hances the intelligibility of speech-in-noise [ 23], we manipulated
intelligibility by allowing subjects to watch a video of the speaker
for one of these repetitions. And although the audio-only speech
was not completely unintelligible, the presence of the video ledto a large, signiﬁcant improvement in intelligibility as measured
by both self-report (p = 4 310
/C05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test)
and a word-detection task (p = 7.9 310/C05, Wilcoxon signed-
rank test). This behavioral effect was mirrored by a signiﬁcant dif-ference in the semantic dissimilarity TRFs between audio-only
and audiovisual conditions ( Figures 3 A and 3B). This difference
was most pronounced at time lags between 380 and 600 ms,where it showed an effect size of d’= 0.55. Notably, this was sub-
stantially later than the interval for the TRF negativity during clean
speech ( Figure 2 ), a fact that may have to do with the increasingdifﬁculty of processing speech under noisy conditions (see
[6, 25 ]). Another way to quantify how intelligibility affects brain
activity is to assess how well our semantic dissimilarity TRFs
can predict unseen EEG responses to natural speech. This
kind of forward-encoding model-based approach has previouslybeen used for predicting EEG responses based on envelope and
phonetic representations of speech [ 21], as well as fMRI activa-
tions based directly on semantic speech vectors [ 26, 27 ] and
semantic distance [ 17]. Using cross-validation to ﬁt and test a
semantic dissimilarity TRF produced a signiﬁcantly better EEG
prediction for audiovisual speech than audio speech on midlineparietal electrode channels ( Figure 3 C; p = 0.01, Wilcoxon
signed-rank test). And although the EEG predictions based on
audio speech were signiﬁcantly greater than zero—after all, the
audio-alone speech was not completely unintelligible (and see[25])—the effect size of adding the visual input on these EEG
predictions scores was large ( d’= 0.84 on midline parietal
electrode Pz). Overall, this demonstrates that our semantic
Figure 2. Temporal Response Functions for Natural and Time-Reversed Speech
(A) Topographic maps of the semantic dissimilarity TRF averaged over all trials and all subjects for natural, forward speech (top) display a marked ce ntro-parietal
negativity between /C24200 and 480 ms. There is no evidence of a similar negativity in the average TRF for time-reversed speech (bottom). Further tests on the
assumption of linearity in the TRF model were conducted and shown in Figure S1 .
(B) Grand average TRF waveforms at selected individual channels show the time course of the negativity related to semantic dissimilarity. Thick line s indicate a
response that is statistically less than zero across subjects (p < 0.05, t test, FDR corrected). Black lines below the waveforms indicate that the TRFs for forward
speech are statistically more negative than those for time-reversed speech across subjects (p < 0.05, t test, FDR corrected).(C) Topographic maps of TRFs averaged over the interval 200–500 ms for selected subjects who took part in both the forward and time-reversed speech ex-periments. For all four subjects, a negativity is apparent for forward speech (albeit with slightly different distributions for each subject) that i s absent for time-
reversed speech. A further study relating this new measure to ‘‘the classic N400’’ is shown in Figure S2 .
Current Biology 28, 803–809, March 5, 2018 805
dissimilarity TRF is sensitive to variations in the intelligibility of
acoustically identical speech. Moreover, in the audiovisual
speech condition, there was a signiﬁcant negative correlation
across subjects between the self-reported intelligibility ratings(which varied broadly) and the amplitude of the TRF negativity
averaged over the interval 250–500 ms ( Figure 3 D; the more
intelligible, the larger the negativity; r=/C00.5, p < 0.02).No Evidence of Contextual Semantic Processing for
Unattended Speech
Over 60 years ago, it was ﬁrst noted that, when attending to one
of two dichotically presented speech streams, people have avery limited ability to report on the content of the speech in the
unattended ear [ 28], a phenomenon known as the cocktail party
effect. Ever since then, researchers have sought to explain this
Figure 3. Assessing the Effect of Comprehension on the Electrophysiological Index of Semantic Dissimilarity
(A) Topographic maps of the semantic dissimilarity TRF averaged over all trials and all subjects for audiovisual speech in /C09 dB of acoustic background noise
display a centro-parietal negativity between /C24400 and 600 ms. This negativity is signiﬁcantly reduced in the average TRF for audio-only speech in the same level
of background noise, which was much less intelligible.(B) Grand-average TRF waveforms for audiovisual and audio-only speech over two selected midline electrodes. Thick lines indicate a response that is statistically
less than zero across subjects (p < 0.05, running t test, FDR corrected). Black lines below the waveforms indicate that the TRFs for audiovisual speech are
statistically more negative than those for audio-only speech across subjects (p < 0.05, running t test, FDR corrected).(C) A cross-validation procedure was used to predict EEG responses to natural speech using a semantic dissimilarity TRF trained on other data. EEG pre diction
accuracy for audiovisual speech was signiﬁcantly greater than that for audio-only speech (p < 0.01, t test).
(D) Across subjects, the amplitude of the semantic dissimilarity TRF over midline parietal scalp was signiﬁcantly correlated with self-reported in telligibility rating of
audiovisual speech (p < 0.02, Pearson’s correlation).(E) Topographic maps of the semantic dissimilarity TRF averaged over all trials and all subjects for attended speech in a dichotic cocktail party para digm display a
centro-parietal negativity between /C24300 and 600 ms. This negativity is not apparent in the average TRF for unattended speech.
(F) Grand average TRF waveforms for attended and unattended speech over two selected midline electrodes. Thick lines indicate a response that is stat istically
less than zero across subjects (p < 0.05, running t test, FDR corrected). Black lines below the waveforms indicate that the TRFs for attended speech are sta-
tistically more negative than those for unattended speech across subjects (p < 0.05, running t test, FDR corrected).(G) A cross-validation procedure was used to predict EEG responses to natural speech using a semantic dissimilarity TRF trained on other data. EEG pre diction
accuracy for attended speech was signiﬁcantly greater than that for unattended speech (p < 1 310
/C06, t test).
(H) Across subjects, the latency of the peak in the global ﬁeld power (GFP) [ 24] of the semantic dissimilarity TRF was signiﬁcantly negatively correlated with the
number of questions answered correctly on the attended speech (p < 5 310/C05, Pearson’s correlation).
806 Current Biology 28, 803–809, March 5, 2018
phenomenon in terms of psychological models [ 29–31 ] and
neurophysiological data [ 32–35 ]. Despite these efforts, the
extent to which unattended speech is semantically processed
by the brain remains unclear [ 24, 36 ]. However, given the very
marked limitations in the ability of subjects to report on the con-
tent of unattended speech, we hypothesized that the negativity
in our TRF, as an index of contextual semantic processing,should be markedly reduced in unattended speech.
We reanalyzed EEG recorded from 33 subjects who attended
to one of two concurrently and dichotically presented audio-
books (17 subjects attended to one story and 16 to the other)[33, 37 ]. The experiment was paused after every /C2460 s, and sub-
jects were asked multiple-choice questions on both stories. We
derived semantic dissimilarity regressors for each of the two stor-ies, and then regressed the EEG data against these vectors to
produce two TRFs—one for the attended story and one for the
unattended story. Consistent with previous studies, the behav-ioral effect of attention was very strong (80% correct answersfor the attended story and 29% for the unattended story—chance
was 25%). Mirroring this large behavioral effect, the TRF corre-
sponding to the attended story showed a clear and prominentnegativity over midline parietal scalp that was signiﬁcantly larger
than the corresponding TRF for the unattended speech, again at
a rather long latency of 380–600 ms ( Figures 3 E and 3F; paired
t test, p = 9.3 310
/C08; effect size d’= 2.0). Although this does
not entirely rule out some level of semantic processing in unat-
tended speech—after all, our regressors are based on one partic-ular computational measure of linguistic processing—it does
present strong evidence of a pronounced reduction in the pro-
cessing of unattended words relative to their context. Oncemore, using cross-validation to ﬁt and test a semantic dissimi-larity TRF produced a signiﬁcantly better EEG prediction for
the attended speech than the unattended speech ( Figure 3 G;
p = 9.36 310
/C07, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). And while the EEG
predictions based on unattended speech were signiﬁcantly
greater than zero—possibly as a result of weak correlations be-
tween the semantic dissimilarity impulses and acoustic energychanges at word onsets—the effect size of attention on these
EEG prediction scores was as large as that on the TRFs them-
selves ( d’= 2.0 at electrode Pz). Unlike for the audiovisual
speech-in-noise experiment above, we found no relationship be-tween the amplitude of the TRF and performance on the attended
questions. This was unsurprising given that the to-be-attended
speech stream was always intelligible. Instead, we found thatthe peak latency of the TRF negativity was signiﬁcantly negatively
correlated with performance on the questions across subjects
(r=/C00.7, p = 1.95 310
/C05). In other words, the earlier a subject’s
TRF peak, the better that subject did on the task. We interpret this
as evidence that people who can successfully sustain their atten-
tion and/or suppress distracting information can more efﬁcientlyprocess the behaviorally relevant speech—or vice versa. This
notion of more efﬁcient semantic processing of words in their
recent historical context aligns with the well-known link betweenworking memory and cocktail party attention performance [ 38].
On the Relationship of the Semantic Dissimilarity TRF
Negativity to the N400 Component
The dominant feature of our semantic dissimilarity TRF is a
negativity over centro-parietal scalp, a feature shared by theEEG measure that has most strongly been linked with semantic
processing—the N400 component. Although this correspon-
dence is not terribly surprising given that the derivation of our
semantic dissimilarity measure was motivated by the fact thatthe N400 is elicited by words that are semantically incongruent
with their context, we have refrained from referring to our
response as being the classic N400. The reason for this isthat the speciﬁc assumptions about semantic dissimilaritythat underlie our TRF analysis are not precisely the same as
the differences in predictability (cloze probability [ 39]) that drive
the development of most N400 stimuli [ 4]. As such, although it
is possible that our approach is simply another way to derive
the classic N400, it is also possible that the two measures
may reﬂect at least partially dissociable processes. As a ﬁrstattempt to examine the relationship between the two responses
more directly, we recorded EEGs from nine subjects who un-
dertook a classic N400 experiment and who listened to theaudiobook used in our ﬁrst-mentioned experiment above. Forthe N400 experiment, subjects read 300 sentences presented
word by word on a screen, half of which ended with a word
that was congruent with the rest of the sentence and half whichended with an incongruent word. N400s were then determined
by subtracting the event-related potential to the congruent
words from that to the incongruent words. And, using theEEG data recorded during the story, we derived a semantic
dissimilarity TRF for each subject as before. The two responses
displayed somewhat similar time courses over midline parietalscalp (although the TRF peaked signiﬁcantly earlier than the
N400; p = 0.012; Figure S2 ), as well as similar topographical
distributions at 375–425 ms. The peak amplitude of the N400component was also signiﬁcantly correlated with the peakamplitude of the semantic dissimilarity TRF across the nine
subjects ( r= 0.751, p = 0.02; Figure S2 ).
DISCUSSION
We have shown that when listening to natural speech, the
ongoing dynamics of cortical activity reﬂect the semantic pro-
cessing of words in context in a rapid, time-locked fashion.And we have shown that indices of this processing are robustlyaffected by whether subjects understand the speech they hear
and whether they are paying attention to that speech. This
approach adds an extra dimension to research on the neuraltracking of natural speech dynamics by directly linking a new
component of that tracking to the contextual semantic process-
ing of speech. Further work will be necessary to more fullycharacterize this online semantic processing. This will include
investigating whether other types of language knowledge
contribute to our measures [ 17], assessing whether unattended
speech is processed at a semantic level that depends less
upon context than our dissimilarity measure, and modeling se-
mantic representation using more neurobiologically motivatedapproaches [ 40] rather than just word co-occurrence. By incor-
porating other computational models into the framework we
have outlined, we would expect that EEG, electrocorticography
(ECoG), and magnetoencephalography (MEG) could be veryuseful in answering these questions.
Gaining deeper insights on these issues will also be helped by
optimizing our analysis. For example, it is likely that generating
Current Biology 28, 803–809, March 5, 2018 807
regressors by aligning impulses to word onsets, as we have
done, is suboptimal. This is because the time taken to semanti-
cally process different words necessarily depends on the words
themselves, their context, and listening conditions. That said, theassumption underlying our analysis is that for the successful
comprehension of natural speech to be possible at all, meaning
must typically be extracted in a relatively online manner—otherwise, we would constantly lose track of what we arehearing. And this assumption appears to be borne out by
existence of the robust TRFs we observe. We hope that the
framework we have introduced here will allow researchers toestimate more optimal locations for the regressor events and/or
regressor events other than impulses. For example, it may be
possible to use a ‘‘reverse’’ approach to discover such optimalregressors [ 41].
It will also be important to more fully examine the relationship
between our TRF and the N400. It is entirely possible that theyare effectively functionally equivalent. That said, although theamplitude correlations between the two measures were signiﬁ-
cant, they were decidedly imperfect, and their peak latencies
also differed signiﬁcantly. Now these differences may be dueto the simple fact that the TRF was derived using audio speech,
whereas the N400 was elicited using reading. But it also remains
possible that the differing assumptions used in producing eachmeasure mean they are reﬂecting different sub-processes
involved in semantic understanding. Future work is needed to
answer this question. This includes efforts to determine whatsub-processes the TRF negativity represents, similar to efforts
involving the N400 [ 42, 43 ]. Either way, it remains the case that
our study has introduced a novel framework for extracting EEGresponses that reﬂect the semantic processing of natural,running speech. This framework could be useful in a broad range
of basic, applied, and clinical research studies.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
dKEY RESOURCES TABLE
dCONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
dEXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
dMETHOD DETAILS
BData Acquisition and Pre-processing
BStimuli and Procedures
BComputational Model and Regression
dQUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
dDATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes two ﬁgures and can be found with this
article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.01.080 .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by the Irish Research Council through the Govern-
ment of Ireland Postgraduate Scholarship scheme (GOIPG/2016/1553 toM.P.B. and GOIPG/2013/1249 to G.D.L.) and a Career Development Awardfrom Science Foundation Ireland (15/CDA/3316; E.C.L.).AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
E.C.L., G.D.L., and A.J.A. conceived of the experiment. M.B, G.D.L., and
M.J.C. collected data. M.B., G.D.L., and A.J.A. analyzed the data. E.C.L. wrotethe ﬁrst draft of the manuscript. M.B., G.D.L. and A.J.A edited the manuscript.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: October 9, 2017
Revised: December 18, 2017Accepted: January 29, 2018Published: February 22, 2018
REFERENCES
1.Crystal, T.H., and House, A.S. (1990). Articulation rate and the duration of
syllables and stress groups in connected speech. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 88,
101–112 .
2.Liberman, A.M., Cooper, F.S., Shankweiler, D.P., and Studdert-Kennedy,
M. (1967). Perception of the speech code. Psychol. Rev. 74, 431–461 .
3.Hagoort, P., and Brown, C.M. (2000). ERP effects of listening to speech:
semantic ERP effects. Neuropsychologia 38, 1518–1530 .
4.Kutas, M., and Federmeier, K.D. (2011). Thirty years and counting: ﬁnding
meaning in the N400 component of the event-related brain potential (ERP).
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 62, 621–647 .
5.Friederici, A.D., Pfeifer, E., and Hahne, A. (1993). Event-related brain
potentials during natural speech processing: effects of semantic, morpho-logical and syntactic violations. Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res. 1, 183–192 .
6.Strauß, A., Kotz, S.A., and Obleser, J. (2013). Narrowed expectancies un-
der degraded speech: revisiting the N400. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 25, 1383–
1395 .
7.Ahissar, E., Nagarajan, S., Ahissar, M., Protopapas, A., Mahncke, H., and
Merzenich, M.M. (2001). Speech comprehension is correlated with tempo-ral response patterns recorded from auditory cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.USA 98, 13367–13372 .
8.Lalor, E.C., and Foxe, J.J. (2010). Neural responses to uninterrupted nat-
ural speech can be extracted with precise temporal resolution. Eur. J.Neurosci. 31, 189–193 .
9.Luo, H., and Poeppel, D. (2007). Phase patterns of neuronal
responses reliably discriminate speech in human auditory cortex.Neuron 54, 1001–1010 .
10.Marslen-Wilson, W. (1973). Linguistic structure and speech shadowing at
very short latencies. Nature 244, 522–523 .
11.Simpson, G.B. (1991). Understanding Word and Sentence Volume 77
(Elsevier) .
12.Tanenhaus, M.K., Spivey-Knowlton, M.J., Eberhard, K.M., and Sedivy,
J.C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic information in spoken lan-guage comprehension. Science 268, 1632–1634 .
13.Landauer, T.K., and Dumais, S.T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s problem: the
latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and representa-tion of knowledge. Psychol. Rev. 104, 211 .
14.Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition
106, 1126–1177 .
15.Pynte, J., New, B., and Kennedy, A. (2008). On-line contextual inﬂuences
during reading normal text: a multiple-regression analysis. Vision Res. 48,
2172–2183 .
16. Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013) Efﬁcient estimation
of word representations in vector space. arXiv, arXiv:1301.3781, http://
arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781 .
17.Frank, S.L., and Willems, R.M. (2017). Word predictability and semantic
similarity show distinct patterns of brain activity during language compre-hension. Lang. Cogn. Neurosci. 32, 1192–1203 .
808 Current Biology 28, 803–809, March 5, 2018
18.Mitchell, J., and Lapata, M. (2010). Composition in distributional models of
semantics. Cogn. Sci. 34, 1388–1429 .
19. Kiela, D., and Clark, S. (2014). A systematic study of semantic vector
space model parameters. Proceedings of the 2ndWorkshop on
Continuous Vector Space Models and their Compositionality (CVSC) atEACL, pp. 21–30.
20.Crosse, M.J., Di Liberto, G.M., Bednar, A., and Lalor, E.C. (2016). The
multivariate temporal response function (mTRF) toolbox: a MATLABtoolbox for relating neural signals to continuous stimuli. Front. Hum.Neurosci. 10,6 0 4 .
21.Di Liberto, G.M., O’Sullivan, J.A., and Lalor, E.C. (2015). Low-frequency
cortical entrainment to speech reﬂects phoneme-level processing. Curr.Biol. 25, 2457–2465 .
22.Crosse, M.J., Di Liberto, G.M., and Lalor, E.C. (2016). Eye can hear clearly
now: inverse effectiveness in natural audiovisual speech processing relieson long-term crossmodal temporal integration. J. Neurosci. 36, 9888–
9895 .
23.Sumby, W.H., and Pollack, I. (1954). Visual contribution to speech intelligi-
bility in noise. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 26, 212–215 .
24.Aydelott, J., Jamaluddin, Z., and Nixon Pearce, S. (2015). Semantic pro-
cessing of unattended speech in dichotic listening. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.138, 964–975 .
25.Ding, N., and Simon, J.Z. (2013). Adaptive temporal encoding leads to a
background-insensitive cortical representation of speech. J. Neurosci.33, 5728–5735 .
26.de Heer, W.A., Huth, A.G., Grifﬁths, T.L., Gallant, J.L., and Theunissen,
F.E. (2017). The hierarchical cortical organization of human speech pro-cessing. J. Neurosci. 37, 6539–6557 .
27.Huth, A.G., de Heer, W.A., Grifﬁths, T.L., Theunissen, F.E., and Gallant,
J.L. (2016). Natural speech reveals the semantic maps that tile human ce-rebral cortex. Nature 532, 453–458 .
28.Cherry, E.C. (1953). Some experiments on the recognition of speech, with
one and with two ears. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 25, 975–979 .
29.Broadbent, D.E. (1958). Perception and Communication (Pergamon
Press) .
30.Deutsch, J.A., and Deutsch, D. (1963). Attention: some theoretical consid-
erations. Psychol. Rev. 70, 80–90 .
31.Treisman, A.M. (1964). Verbal cues, language, and meaning in selective
attention. Am. J. Psychol. 77, 206–219 .
32.Mesgarani, N., and Chang, E.F. (2012). Selective cortical representation of
attended speaker in multi-talker speech perception. Nature 485, 233–236 .
33.Power, A.J., Foxe, J.J., Forde, E.J., Reilly, R.B., and Lalor, E.C. (2012). At
what time is the cocktail party? A late locus of selective attention to naturalspeech. Eur. J. Neurosci. 35, 1497–1503 .
34.Teder, W., Kujala, T., and N €a€at€anen, R. (1993). Selection of speech mes-
sages in free-ﬁeld listening. Neuroreport 5, 307–309 .
35.Zion Golumbic, E.M., Ding, N., Bickel, S., Lakatos, P., Schevon, C.A.,
McKhann, G.M., Goodman, R.R., Emerson, R., Mehta, A.D., Simon, J.Z.,et al. (2013). Mechanisms underlying selective neuronal tracking of at-
tended speech at a ‘‘cocktail party’’. Neuron 77
, 980–991 .
36.Lachter, J., Forster, K.I., and Ruthruff, E. (2004). Forty-ﬁve years after
Broadbent (1958): still no identiﬁcation without attention. Psychol. Rev.111, 880–913 .
37.O’Sullivan, J.A., Power, A.J., Mesgarani, N., Rajaram, S., Foxe, J.J.,
Shinn-Cunningham, B.G., Slaney, M., Shamma, S.A., and Lalor, E.C.(2015). Attentional selection in a cocktail party environment can be de-coded from single-trial EEG. Cereb. Cortex 25, 1697–1706 .
38.Conway, A.R., Cowan, N., and Bunting, M.F. (2001). The cocktail party
phenomenon revisited: the importance of working memory capacity.Psychon. Bull. Rev. 8, 331–335 .
39.Taylor, W.L. (1953). ‘‘Cloze procedure’’: a new tool for measuring read-
ability. Journalism Bulletin 30, 415–433 .
40.Anderson, A.J., Binder, J.R., Fernandino, L., Humphries, C.J., Conant,
L.L., Aguilar, M., Wang, X., Doko, D., and Raizada, R.D.S. (2017).Predicting neural activity patterns associated with sentences using a neu-robiologically motivated model of semantic representation. Cereb. Cortex27, 4379–4395 .
41.Huth, A.G., Lee, T., Nishimoto, S., Bilenko, N.Y., Vu, A.T., and Gallant, J.L.
(2016). Decoding the semantic content of natural movies from human brainactivity. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 10,8 1.
42.Lau, E.F., Phillips, C., and Poeppel, D. (2008). A cortical network for se-
mantics: (de)constructing the N400. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 920–933 .
43.Lau, E.F., Holcomb, P.J., and Kuperberg, G.R. (2013). Dissociating N400
effects of prediction from association in single-word contexts. J. Cogn.Neurosci. 25, 484–502 .
44.Delorme, A., and Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for
analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent componentanalysis. J. Neurosci. Methods 134, 9–21 .
45.Crosse, M.J., Butler, J.S., and Lalor, E.C. (2015). Congruent visual speech
enhances cortical entrainment to continuous auditory speech in noise-freeconditions. J. Neurosci. 35, 14195–14204 .
46.Ding, N., Chatterjee, M., and Simon, J.Z. (2014). Robust cortical entrain-
ment to the speech envelope relies on the spectro-temporal ﬁne structure.Neuroimage 88, 41–46 .
47.Parsons, T.W. (1987). Voice and Speech Processing (McGraw-Hill
College) .
48. Baroni, M., Dinu, G., and Kruszewski. G. (2014). Don’t count, predict!
A systematic comparison of context-counting vs. context-predicting se-mantic vectors. In Proceedings of the 52
ndAnnual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, Volume 1, Long Papers
(Association for Computational Linguistics), pp. 238–247.
49.Gorman, K., Howell, J., and Wagner, M. (2011). Prosodylab-aligner: a tool
for forced alignment of laboratory speech. Can. Acoust. 39, 192–193 .
50.Benjamini, Y., and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery
rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat.Soc. Series B Stat. Methodol. 57, 289–300 .
Current Biology 28, 803–809, March 5, 2018 809
STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, Michael Broderick
(brodermi@tcd.ie ). There is no restriction for distribution of materials.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
All subjects were native English speakers, and reported normal hearing, normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and no history of
neurological disease. 19 subjects (13 male) aged between 19 and 38 years participated in the ﬁrst experiment involving listening
to a single audiobook. Of these 19 subjects, 9 also participated in the N400 experiment. Ten subjects (7 male) aged between 21and 32 years participated in the experiment involving the time-reversed audiobook (5 of these subjects participated in the ﬁrst exper-
iment above). 34 subjects (28 male) with a mean age of 27.3 ± 3.2 (SD) years participated in the cocktail party attention experiment,
but data from one subject was not included in the analysis as the recordings from their mastoid electrodes were of poor quality.21 subjects (6 female) aged between 21 and 35 years participated in the multisensory speech experiment. Much of the data fromthese experiments has previously been published in studies examining how EEG tracks the envelope and phonetic content of speech
[21, 22, 32, 37 ]. All procedures were undertaken in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and were approved by the Ethics
Committees of the School of Psychology at Trinity College Dublin, and the Health Sciences Faculty at Trinity College Dublin.
METHOD DETAILS
Data Acquisition and Pre-processing
For all experiments, 128-channel EEG data (plus two mastoid channels) were acquired at a rate of 512 Hz using an ActiveTwo system
(BioSemi). Triggers indicating the start of each trial were sent by the stimulus presentation computer and included in the EEG record-ings to ensure synchronization. Ofﬂine, the data were band-pass ﬁltered between 1 and 8 Hz, downsampled to 128 Hz, and re-refer-enced to the average of the mastoid channels in MATLAB. To identify channels with excessive noise, the time series were visually
inspected and the SD of each channel was compared with that of the surrounding channels. Channels contaminated by noise
were recalculated by spline interpolating the surrounding clean channels in EEGLAB [ 44].
Stimuli and Procedures
In the ﬁrst experiment, subjects undertook 20 trials, each of the same length (just under 180 s), where they were presented with aprofessional audio-book version of a popular mid-20th century American work of ﬁction written in an economical and understated
style and read by a single male American speaker. The trials preserved the storyline, with neither repetitions nor discontinuities.
The average speech rate was /C24210 words/min. Similarly, the second experiment involved the presentation of the same trials in
the same order, but with each of the 28 speech segments played in reverse. All stimuli were presented monophonically at a
sampling rate of 44.1 kHz using Sennheiser HD650 headphones and Presentation software from Neurobehavioral SystemsREAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER
Deposited DataEEG data, stimuli and behavioral measures Dryad https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.070jc
Software and AlgorithmsMATLAB 2016b The MathWorks https://uk.mathworks.com/
Presentation Software Neurobehavioral Systems https://www.neurobs.com/
mTRF Toolbox M.J. Crosse, G.M. Liberto, E.C. Lalor https://sourceforge.net/projects/aespa/
Other
Sennheiser HD650 headphones Sennheiser Electronic N/A
‘The Old Man and the Sea’ by Ernest Hemingway Charles Schribner’s Sons N/A
‘20000 Leagues Under the Sea’ by Jules Verne Pierre-Jules Hetzel N/A
‘Journey to the Center of the Earth’ by Jules Verne Pierre-Jules Hetzel N/A
Obama’s Weekly Address The White House https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/
brieﬁng-room/weekly-address
e1Current Biology 28, 803–809.e1–e3, March 5, 2018
(http://www.neurobs.com ). Testing was carried out in a dark, sound-attenuated room and subjects were instructed to maintain visual
ﬁxation on a crosshair centered on the screen for the duration of each trial, and to minimize eye blinking and all other motor activities.
Data from 10 of the subjects (aged 23–38 years; 7 male) who participated in the ﬁrst experiment and all of the subjects (aged 21–32
years; 7 male) who participated in the second experiment have been published previously [ 21]. Data from an additional 9 subjects
(aged 19–32 years, 6 male) for the ﬁrst experiment were collected for the current study.
In the N400 experiment, subjects read 300 sentences presented word-by-word on a screen, half of which ended with a word that
was congruent (high cloze probability) with the rest of the sentence and half which ended with an incongruent (low cloze probability)word. N400s were then determined by subtracting the event-related potential to the congruent words from that to the incongruentwords. And, using the EEG data recorded during the story, we derived a semantic dissimilarity TRF for each subject as before.
In the cocktail party experiment, 33 subjects (aged 23–38 years; 27 male) undertook 30 trials, each of 60 s in length, where they
were presented with 2 classic works of ﬁction: one to the left ear, and the other to the right ear. Each story was read by a differentmale speaker. Subjects were divided into 2 groups of 17 and 16 (+1 excluded subject) with each group instructed to attend to the
story in either the left or right ear throughout the entire 30 trials. After each trial, subjects were required to answer between 4 and
6 multiple-choice questions on both stories. Each question had 4 possible answers. We used a between-subjects design as wewanted each subject to follow just one story to make the experiment as natural as possible and because we wished to avoid any
repeated presentation of stimuli. For both stories, each trial began where the story ended on the previous trial. Stimulus amplitudes
in each audio stream within each trial were normalized to have the same root mean squared (RMS) intensity. In order to minimize thepossibility of the unattended stream capturing the subjects’ attention during silent periods in the attended stream, silent gapsexceeding 0.5 s were truncated to 0.5 s in duration. Stimuli were presented using Sennheiser HD650 headphones and Presentation
software from Neurobehavioral Systems ( http://www.neurobs.com ). Subjects were instructed to maintain visual ﬁxation on a cross-
hair centered on the screen for the duration of each trial, and to minimize eye blinking and all other motor activities. The data from allsubjects in this experiment have been published previously [ 33, 37 ].
For the multisensory experiment, the stimuli were drawn from a set of videos that consisted of a male speaking American English in
a conversational-like manner. Fifteen 60 s videos were rendered into 1280 3720-pixel movies at 30 frames/s and exported in audio-
only (A), visual-only (V), and AV format in VideoPad Video Editor (NCH Software). The soundtracks were sampled at 48 kHz, under-
went dynamic range compression, and were matched in RMS intensity (see [ 45]), and were mixed with spectrally-matched stationary
noise to ensure consistent masking across stimuli [ 25, 46 ]. The noise stimuli were generated in MATLAB (The MathWorks) using a
50th-order forward linear predictive model estimated from the original speech recording. Prediction order was calculated based
on the sampling rate of the soundtracks [ 47]. The data analyzed here were from the A and AV condition only. Please note, the pre-
sentation order of A, and AV repetitions was randomized across the 15 videos and across subjects. The data from all 21 subjects(aged 21–35 years; 13 male) in this experiment have been published previously [ 22].
Computational Model and Regression
Semantic vectors for content words were derived using the state-of-the-art word2vec algorithm [ 16]. The ‘‘continuous bag of words’’
implementation built in [ 48] was selected because this was trained on British English corpora (ukWaC, the English Wikipedia and the
British National Corpus combined) which is both large and probably more reﬂective of the language exposure of the participants
(in Dublin) than US corpora. In addition, word vectors are freely downloadable (see [ 48]). Word2vec embodies the ‘‘distributional hy-
pothesis’’ that words with similar meaning occur in similar contexts in an artiﬁcial neural network approach. Practically, the approach
involves sliding a ﬁxed window of words (11 in this case, however this is a parameter set by the experimenter) over a text corpus and
training a neural network to predict the word in the center of that window. Word identity (as opposed to semantics) is uniquely en-coded as a single bit set to one in a long vector of zeros (vector length is the number of words in the vocabulary). These long vectorsform the basis of the input and output to the neural network. The input corresponds to the sum of the 10 word vectors in the window,
the output is the central word. Because word order is lost in this summation, the input is analogous to an unordered bag of words. The
network contains an internal hidden layer of 400 dimensions. The hidden layer is fully connected to the input and output. It is in fact theweights on the connections between the input and hidden layer that are ultimately harvested to form the semantic model (the weights
are a number-of-words in the vocabulary by 400 ﬂoating point matrix) and the remainder of the network is discarded. Weights are
initially set as random, but are subsequently optimized so as to reduce error between predicted and target output. Intuitively, becausewords that frequently appear together in the same context window also predict similar central words, weights on these words are
tuned to similar internal representations reﬂecting common contexts. For more details on the training procedure see [ 48] and [ 16]
(note, the choice of 400 dimensions for the internal layer was arbitrary and, as described in the next paragraph, these 400-dimen-sional vectors are reduced to a single correlation measure).
Having obtained a vector for each word, we then quantiﬁed how semantically dissimilar each particular word was to the preceding
words in the corresponding sentence. We did this by calculating a Pearson’s correlation between the word’s 400-dimensional vectorand the average of the vectors corresponding to all the preceding words in that particular sentence, and subtracting this correlationfrom 1 (where a speciﬁc word was the ﬁrst word in a sentence, we calculated the correlation between the word and the average of all
word vectors in the previous sentence, before, again, subtracting that correlation from 1). It should be noted that, this kind of simple
feature-wise averaging/summation of word-level semantic vectors has proven to be an effective and enduring method of modelingsemantic composition in computational linguistics (e.g., [ 18, 19 ]). It has also been proven to be a successful method for predicting
fMRI activation patterns associated with sentences’ meanings (e.g., [ 40]). However, it should also be noted that the approach is a
Current Biology 28, 803–809.e1–e3, March 5, 2018 e2
gross oversimpliﬁcation of the complexities of semantic composition in the brain (and does not take into account the effects of word
order or syntax – see discussion [ 40]). In any case, our approach produced a single semantic dissimilarity measure for each word with
a value between 0 and 2. We then created a ‘‘semantic dissimilarity vector’’ at the same sampling rate as our EEG data (128 Hz) which
consisted of time-aligned impulses at the onset of each word that were scaled according to the value of that word’s semantic dissim-ilarity. The word onset times were determined by performing forced alignment of the speech ﬁles and the corresponding textual
orthographical transcription using the Prosodylab-Aligner, which has been shown to produce alignments with median precision
(misalignment) on the order of 10 ms [ 49].
A system identiﬁcation technique was used to compute a channel-speciﬁc mapping between the semantic dissimilarity vector and
the recorded EEG data, commonly referred to as a temporal response function (TRF). A TRF can be interpreted as a ﬁlter that de-
scribes the brain’s linear transformation of a stimulus feature, S( t), to the continuous neural response, R( t), over a series of speciﬁed
time lags: R( t) = TRF*S( t), where ‘*’ represents the convolution operator. Speciﬁcally, estimation of the TRF weights was performed
using regularized linear regression, wherein a regularization (ridge) parameter was tuned to control overﬁtting (see [ 20] for a detailed
description of this step).
In previous work, we have attempted to cast our TRF functions with mV as their unit of measure. However, this relies on a decision to
normalize the input stimulus values between some limits and, as such, has been somewhat arbitrary. In the present work, and in line
with previous work from other groups, the EEG data on each channel was z-scored prior to estimating the TRF, meaning that the
TRFs are ultimately presented in arbitrary units. The colors in the TRF topographic plots can be interpreted as follows: red at a partic-ular latency indicates that, at that poststimulus lag, the EEG voltage is driven in a positive direction by a unit change in semanticdissimilarity; blue means the EEG voltage at that poststimulus lag is driven negative by a similar change. Thus, given the same
normalization strategy for the various speech stimuli used in this study, the TRF responses can be compared in terms of their am-
plitudes, despite their description in terms of arbitrary units.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
TRF waveforms in Figures 2 B,3B, 3F and S2A were tested as being signiﬁcantly less than zero using a running one-tailed t test across
subjects. The resulting p values were corrected using the False Discovery Rate (FDR) method [ 50]. Thicker lines indicate time points
of responses that are statistically less than zero (p < 0.05). Statistical differences between TRF waveforms for forward versus time-reversed speech ( Figure 2 B), audio-only versus audiovisual conditions ( Figure 3 B) and attended versus unattended ( Figure 3 F) were
tested using one-tailed t tests. The resulting p values were FDR corrected. In experiment 2, to evaluate the improvement in intelligi-
bility from audio to audiovisual conditions via self-report and word detection tasks, we used Wilcoxon signed-rank tests. To quantifyeffect size ( d’) in comparing mean TRF responses for audio versus audiovisual speech (experiment 2) and attended versus unat-
tended speech (experiment 3) we used Cohen’s d (for experiment 2, n = 21 and for experiment 3, n = 33). The same measure of effect
size was used to compare EEG prediction accuracies in experiments 2 ( Figure 3 C) and 3 ( Figure 3 G). The difference in magnitude of
the negative component between the attended and unattended TRFs was supported by statistical testing across subjects using apaired t test. Correlations between behavioral measures and mean TRF amplitude ( Figure 3 D) and latency ( Figure 3 H) were quantiﬁed
using Pearson’s correlation (n = 21 and n = 33, respectively). Correlations between TRF amplitude and N400 amplitude ( Figure S2 B)
were quantiﬁed using Pearson’s correlation (n = 9). Differences in N400 and TRF peak latency distributions ( Figure S2 D) were tested
using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Our data is available to download via Dryad at https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.070jc . The TRF analysis was carried out using the
freely available multivariate temporal response function (mTRF) toolbox, which can be downloaded from https://sourceforge.net/
projects/aespa/ .
e3Current Biology 28, 803–809.e1–e3, March 5, 2018
