PROSODYLAB-ALIGNER: A TOOL FOR FORCED ALIGNMENT OF LABORATORY SPEECH
Kyle Gorman,1 Jonathan Howell,2 and Michael Wagner2
1Department of Linguistics and Institute for Research in Cognitive Science, University of Pennsylvania, 619 Williams Hall,  
255 S. 36th St., Philadelphia, PA, U.S.A., 19104-6305
 2Department of Linguistics, McGill University, 1085 Dr. Penfield, Montreal, QC, Canada, H3A 1A7
1.INTRODUCTION 
Recordings of speech, whether spontaneously generated  
or  elicited  in  the  lab,  are  an  important  data  source  for  
linguists, but the time required to produce by hand the time  
indices necessary to perform acoustic feature extraction is  
often  prohibitive.  The Penn Forced Aligner (Yuan & 
Liberman 2008)  automates the alignment process using the  
Hidden Markov Model Toolkit (HTK),1 a  speech 
recognition  software  package.  However,  it  is  limited  to 
certain  sample  rates,  and  can  only  perform  alignments  
according to an included North American English acoustic  
model; it does not support training of new acoustic models 
for different languages or domains.
2.A NEW TOOL
We  have  constructed  a  new  software  package,  
Prosodylab-Aligner, which, like the Penn Forced Aligner,  
uses HTK for forced alignment. However, it also permits the  
experimenter to use transcribed (but not necessarily aligned)  
audio to train new acoustic models. Prosodylab-Aligner is  
open-source and available for free online.2
The core of Prosodylab-Aligner is align.py, a script 
which performs acoustic model training and alignment. This 
script automates calls to HTK and SoX,3 an open-source 
command-line tool which is capable of resampling audio.  
The  included  README file  provides instructions for 
installing HTK and SoX on Linux and Mac OS X, and can 
also be run on Windows. 
2.1 Preprocessing
The  align.py script checks for missing data files,  
and terminates if an audio or transcript file (indicated by the  
extensions  .wav and  .lab,  respectively)  is  lacking  its  
companion  label  or  audio  file,  after  printing  a  list  of  
“orphan”  data  files.  It  also  checks  for  words  in  the  
transcripts  which  are  not  found  in  the  pronunciation  
dictionary,  if  any  out-of-dictionary  words  are  found,  
terminates after printing this list. Both of these steps permit  
the  experimenter  to  correct  for  missing  data  before  
proceeding with alignment or training. 
1 http://htk.eng.cam.ac.uk/
2 http://prosodylab.org/tools/aligner/
3 http://sox.sourceforge.net/2.2 Acoustic Model
The  Prosodylab-Aligner  acoustic models are 
monophone Gaussian mixtures consisting of 39  Mel 
frequency cepstral coefficients (Mermelstein 1976).
2.3 Training Routine
By  default,  the  input  data  is  aligned  using  a  
precomputed acoustic model trained from North American  
English laboratory speech (see Section 4), but with the -t 
flag,  the  experimenter  can  provide  training  data  for  
estimating  a  new  acoustic  model.  In  many  cases,  it  is  
desirable for the training set will be the same as the test set. 
During training, the model is initialized with f lat-start 
monophones, which are then submitted to a single round (by 
default, four iterations)  of model estimation.  Then,  a tied-
state “small pause” model is inserted and used in a second 
round of estimation. The data is then aligned once to choose 
the most likely pronunciation of all homonyms (i.e., 
dictionary entries with the same orthographic form), and a 
final  round  of  estimation  is  performed.  T he optimal 
alignments are computed and the resulting word and phone 
alignments are written to Praat4 TextGrid files. 
A separate flag (-T) can be used to trigger a final round  
of  speaker-dependent  training  and  speaker-dependent  
alignment. 
2.4 Helper Scripts
Several other scripts are included for related tasks: 
aligning  a single audio/label pair (align_ex.sh),  fixing 
errors in label files (fix_lab.py),  or downloading the 
CMU English pronunciation dictionary (get_dict.sh).
3.EXPERIMENTAL PIPELINE
Prosodylab-Aligner  plays  an  integral  part  in  an  
experimental pipeline for speech data, both elicited in the  
laboratory with controlled experiments, and harvested from  
the web (Howell & Rooth 2009; Rooth et al. 2011).
3.1 Laboratory Data elicited
Laboratory data is using a suite of MATLAB scripts  
designed  for  production  experiments.  The  experimenter  
enters the stimuli into a spreadsheet, indicating “words of  
interest” found in target stimuli, and organizes stimuli into  
items  and  conditions.  These  are  them  randomized  and  
4 http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/
presented  as  the  elicitation  “script”  for  the  subject.  The  
experimenter  then  verifies  that  the  resulting  utterance  
produced matches the text presented to the subject.
3.2 Web Data
Web  audio  (in  MP3  format)  is  downloaded  from  
Ramp,5 a  company  which  indexes  radio  and  television  
programming, including NBC, PBS, Fox and CBS Radio,  
and  processed  using  standard  UNIX  tools.  The  
transcriptions  produced  by  Ramp  are  sufficient  for  
identifying  a  targeted  linguistic  construction  (with  
approximately 50% accuracy), but the experimenter must  
still listen to the audio files to eliminate false positives. 
3.3 Data Comparison
It is desirable to be able to compare lab and web data,  
and thus to use the acoustic model for alignment. While  
WAV  files  and  a  uniform  sample  rate  is  used  in  the  
laboratory, web audio recording quality is inconsistent (bit  
rate between 32-256 kbit/s and sample rate between 11025-
44100Hz). For this reason, when training is performed by  
align.py, the experimenter may also specify sample rate  
(with the -s flag): any training or test audio data that does  
not conform to this sample rate is automatically resampled  
using SoX. 
3.4 Post-alignment Processing
A  script  marks  “words  of  interest”  in  the  aligned  
TextGrids, and a Praat script extracts acoustic measurements  
from each  word of  interest for  later  statistical analysis.  
4.EV ALUATION
The North American English acoustic models provided  
with  Prosodylab-Aligner  produce  alignments  of  
impressionistically  high  quality.  To  quantify  alignment  
quality, we use a single annotator's hand alignment from a  
prior study as a gold standard: Howell & Rooth (2009) and  
Howell (2011) gathered tokens of the phrase “than I did”  
embedded in longer utterances harvested from the web, and  
127 tokens of this phrase hand-aligned at the phone level.
For  each  file  and  for  each  phone  boundary  in  this  
phrase, we compute the magnitude of the distance from the  
gold  standard  for  Prosodylab-Aligner,  as  well  as  for  the  
Penn Forced Aligner. The results in Table 1 suggest that the  
two  aligners  produce  alignments  of  comparable  quality.  
Figure  1  shows  that  both  aligners  have  comparable  
magnitude difference compared to the gold standard.
5.CONCLUSIONS
The Penn Forced Aligner is a useful tool for linguists  
interested  in  acoustic  properties  of  speech.  Prosodylab-
Aligner further empowers the experimenter by automating  
the  difficult  task  of  constructing  domain-appropriate  
acoustic models to use for forced alignment.
5  http://www.ramp.com/Table 1.  Magnitude difference compared to 
hand-aligned gold standard
Mean | Δ| (s)Median | Δ| (s)
Prosodylab-Aligner 0.3060 0.0119
Penn Forced Aligner 0.2061 0.0124
Figure 1.  Magnitude difference compared to 
hand-aligned gold standard
REFERENCES
Howell,  J.  And  Rooth,  M.  (2009).  Web  harvest  of  minimal  
intonational pairs. In I. Alegria, I. Leturia, and S. Sharoff (ed.),  
Proceedings  of  the  5th Web  as  Corpus  Workshop,  45-52.  San  
Sebastian: Elhuyar Fundazioa.
Howell, Jonathan. (2011). Meaning and prosody: On the web, in  
the  lab  and  from  the  theorist's  armchair.  Doctoral  dissertation,  
Cornell University.
Mermelstein, P. (1976). Distance measures for speech recognition,  
psychological  and  instrumental.  In  C-H  Chen  (ed.),  Pattern  
recognition  and  artificial  intelligence , 374-388 .  New  York:  
Academic Press.
Rooth, M., Howell, J., and Wagner, M. (2011). Harvesting speech  
datasets  for  linguistic  research  on  the  web.  Paper  presented  at  
Digging into Data Challenge Conference. 
Yuan, J. And Liberman, M. (2008). Speaker identification on the  
SCOTUS corpus. In Proceedings of Acoustics 2008, 5687-5690 .
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by grants to the third author from  
FQRSC (Nouvelle NP-132516) and SSHRC (Digging into Data  
Challenge Grant 869-2009-0004; Canada Research Chair 218503).

