Article
Low-Frequency Cortical Entrainment to Speech
Reﬂects Phoneme-Level Processing
Highlights
dEEG reﬂects categorical processing of phonemes within
continuous speech
dEEG is best modeled when representing speech as acousticsignal plus phoneme labels
dNeural delta and theta bands reﬂect this speech-speciﬁccortical activity
dSpeciﬁc speech articulatory features are discriminable in EEGresponsesAuthors
Giovanni M. Di Liberto, James A.O’Sullivan, Edmund C. Lalor
Correspondence
diliberg@tcd.ie (G.M.D.L.),
edlalor@tcd.ie (E.C.L.)
In Brief
Di Liberto et al. show that EEG responses
to natural speech are best modeled whenthat speech is represented in terms of itslow-level acoustics plus a categoricallabeling of phonetic features. Thissuggests that EEG reﬂects categoricalphoneme-level speech processing andprovides a new framework for studyingsuch processing.
Di Liberto et al., 2015, Current Biology 25, 2457–2465
October 5, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.08.030

Current Biology
Article
Low-Frequency Cortical Entrainment to Speech
Reﬂects Phoneme-Level Processing
Giovanni M. Di Liberto,1,*James A. O’Sullivan,1and Edmund C. Lalor1,*
1Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, School of Engineering, and Trinity Centre for Bioengineering Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland
*Correspondence: diliberg@tcd.ie (G.M.D.L.), edlalor@tcd.ie (E.C.L.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.08.030
SUMMARY
The human ability to understand speech is under-
pinned by a hierarchical auditory system whose suc-cessive stages process increasingly complex attri-butes of the acoustic input. It has been suggestedthat to produce categorical speech perception, this
system must elicit consistent neural responses to
speech tokens (e.g., phonemes) despite variationsin their acoustics. Here, using electroencephalog-raphy (EEG), we provide evidence for this categoricalphoneme-level speech processing by showing thatthe relationship between continuous speech andneural activity is best described when that speechis represented using both low-level spectrotemporal
information and categorical labeling of phonetic fea-
tures. Furthermore, the mapping between phonemesand EEG becomes more discriminative for phoneticfeatures at longer latencies, in line with what onemight expect from a hierarchical system. Impor-tantly, these effects are not seen for time-reversedspeech. These ﬁndings may form the basis for futureresearch on natural language processing in speciﬁc
cohorts of interest and for broader insights into
how brains transform acoustic input into meaning.
INTRODUCTION
Humans effortlessly parse the spectrotemporally complex
acoustic patterns of continuous speech into coherent, categori-cal, semantic representations. This is true despite enormous var-
iations in the low-level spectrotemporal dynamics of speech
across listening conditions, including different speaker accents,coarticulation effects, and prosodic ﬂuctuations. Although the
precise neurophysiological mechanisms and neuroanatomic
infrastructure underpinning this ability are not well understood[1], it has been proposed that robust speech perception is the
product of a hierarchical auditory processing system whose suc-
cessive stages process increasingly complex attributes of theaudio input [ 2–4]. In particular, it has been suggested that, while
earlier areas of the auditory system undoubtedly respond to
acoustic differences in speech tokens, later areas must exhibit
consistent neural responses to those tokens in order to producea categorical perception of words and phonemes [ 2–4].
fMRI [ 5, 6], nonhuman primate electrophysiology [ 7], and elec-
trocorticography (ECoG) [ 4, 8, 9 ] have all made important contri-butions to our understanding of hierarchical speech encoding in
the brain. However, all of these methods have their shortcom-
ings. Electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalog-raphy (MEG), as macroscopic non-invasive technologies, may
offer important opportunities for further progress. Although these
approaches have been used for years to study the processing ofdiscrete syllables [ 10], recent research has also shown that both
EEG and MEG index cortical entrainment to the low-frequency
amplitude envelope of natural speech [ 11–13 ]. This has proved
useful for investigating the mechanisms underlying speechprocessing [ 14], how such processing is affected by attention
[13, 15, 16 ], and how audio and visual speech interact [ 17, 18 ].
However, it remains unclear to what extent these EEG/MEGindices reﬂect higher-level speech-speciﬁc processing versus
lower-level processing of the spectrotemporal/acoustic stimulus
dynamics [ 19].
There has been somewhat equivocal evidence that speech
intelligibility affects these envelope entrainment measures, sug-
gesting that they may indeed index speech-speciﬁc processing
[20–22 ]. These ﬁndings have led to the suggestion that different
neural populations, having different functional roles in receptive
speech processing, may simultaneously contribute to envelope
entrainment measures [ 19]. Support for this notion comes
from ECoG research focusing on low-frequency entrainment
to speech that has shown differential effects of ‘‘cocktail
party’’-type attention in low- and higher-level auditory corticalareas [ 9]. However, there has been no deﬁnitive evidence to
date that low-frequency EEG or MEG entrainment reﬂects pro-
cessing at the level of categorical speech perception.
Here we investigated the degree to which low-level (envelope,
spectrogram) and higher-level (phonemic, phonetic feature)
characteristics of natural speech are reﬂected in EEG activity.
In doing so, we provide evidence that EEG not only reﬂects pas-sive neural following of the acoustic energy of speech but also
indexes the categorical perception of phonemes in the human
brain. Furthermore, we sought to determine whether processingof different phonetic features can be discriminated in EEG re-
sponses and found that this discriminative power varies as a
function of response latency, in line with what one might expectof a hierarchical system.
RESULTS
128-channel EEG was recorded from ten subjects as they
listened to segments of an audiobook and ten subjects wholistened to the same audiobook played in reverse (ﬁve subjects
undertook both experiments). To identify neural indices of lower-
and higher-level speech processing, we investigated mappings
Current Biology 25, 2457–2465, October 5, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 2457
between different representations of the speech and the low-
frequency (1–15 Hz) EEG ( Figure 1 ). Speciﬁcally, we did this by
using linear regression to model the relationship between eachspeech representation and the data from each EEG channel
(Figure 1 ). This approach has been used previously to describe
the relationship between the speech envelope and EEG [ 12],
MEG [ 23], and ECoG [ 9] data. The resulting models are
commonly referred to as temporal response functions (TRFs).
Here, as we will be representing speech using multiple variables,
we refer to our models as multivariate temporal response func-tions (mTRFs).
Neural Evidence for Phonetic Processing
We employed a cross-validation approach to quantify how well
each speech representation related to the neural data. Specif-
ically, we ﬁt our mTRF models using a subset of the speech seg-ments for each subject and used these models to predict the
data corresponding to the remaining segments. The quality of
the prediction was assessed using correlation (Pearson’s r).The overarching rationale was to use variations in these EEG pre-diction scores across speech representations as a dependent
measure for assessing how well the EEG reﬂects the processing
of lower- and higher-level speech features. We focused our anal-ysis on the EEG data from six bilateral pairs of frontotemporal
electrodes in order to investigate auditory cortical activity bilater-
ally (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures andFigure S1 ).We tested ﬁve speech representations ( Figure 1 ; see Supple-
mental Experimental Procedures ): (1) broadband amplitude en-
velope, Env; (2) spectrogram, Sgram ; (3) time-aligned sequence
of phonemes, Ph; (4) time-aligned sequence of phonetic
features, Fea; and (5) a combination of time-aligned phonetic
features and spectrogram, FS. Neural entrainment to speech en-
velopes is well established and, as such, performance of the Env
model acted as a baseline with which to compare the perfor-
mance of the other models. Robust mappings between speech
spectrograms and high-gamma-frequency ECoG have beenpreviously shown [ 24]. However it is unknown whether this richer
representation can be accurately indexed using low-frequency
EEG, something we address with the Sgram model. Similarly,
the relationship between high-frequency ECoG and a categorical
phoneme representation of speech has been examined before
[8]. However, no such relationship has been investigated for
EEG (or MEG), hence the Phmodel. Transforming phonemes
into a lower-dimensional phonetic-feature representation [ 25]
frames our results in terms of the articulatory and acoustic prop-erties of each phoneme and has advantages for the efﬁciency ofthis type of modeling. This motivated our Feamodel.
An important issue when considering the spectrogram repre-
sentation and the phonemic/phonetic-feature representationsis that they are mutually highly redundant. This is because, on
average, each phoneme will have a particular characteristic
spectrotemporal proﬁle. So if each phoneme were always
Figure 1. Assessing the Encoding of Speech Features in EEG
128-channel EEG data were recorded while subjects listened to continuous, natural speech consisting of a male speaker reading from a novel or its time -reversed
complement. Linear regression was used to ﬁt multivariate temporal response functions (mTRFs) between the low-frequency (1–15 Hz) EEG data and ﬁvedifferent representations of the speech stimulus. Each mTRF model was then tested for its ability to predict EEG using leave-one-out cross-validati on.
2458 Current Biology 25, 2457–2465, October 5, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
spoken in the same way, then the two representations would be
equivalent. However, in natural speech this is not the case, withsigniﬁcant variation in the spectrotemporal proﬁle of a given
phoneme across instances. One might thus expect that our Ph
model, which is ignorant of these variations, would underperformrelative to the Sgram model. However, it is also true that human
listeners categorically perceive phonemes despite spectrotem-
poral variations, a fact that is presumably underpinned byconsistent neural responses to those phonemes [ 2, 3]. Such
consistent responses would be captured by our Phmodel,
potentially leading to it outperforming the Sgram model, which
is ignorant of the categorical nature of these utterances. Indeed,given their mutual redundancy and complementary strengths,
both models may perform similarly. To attempt to reveal their
complementary strengths, we also derived a model based oncombining the time-aligned phonetic features and the corre-
sponding speech spectrogram (the FSmodel). Improved perfor-
mance of this model over the others would suggest that the EEGis indexing the processing of both low-level acoustic ﬂuctuations
and higher-level phonetic features.
In line with this hypothesis, the average performance of the FS
model across our 12 chosen electrodes was better than all othermodels (ANOVA: F(1.5,13.6) = 29.1, p = 2.9 310
/C05; post hoc
paired t test comparisons of FSwith all other models: p =
0.001, p = 0.002, p = 8.2 310/C05, p = 0.001 for Env,Sgram ,Ph,
and Fea respectively; Figure 2 A). Indeed, FSwas best for all
ten subjects ( Figure 2 B). The fact that the Phand Feamodels
are simple transformations of one another was reﬂected in thelack of any performance difference between them (p > 0.05).
There was also no difference between the PhorFeaand Sgram
models (p = 0.24 and p = 0.34, respectively), which, as
mentioned previously, was always a possibility. Importantly,
given the reliance on envelope in many studies of speech neuro-physiology [ 9, 14, 26 ], the Envmodel underperformed relative to
all other models (p < 0.01). Furthermore, we found no lateraliza-
tion effects in the performance of any model (p > 0.05, ANOVA).Indeed, model performances were qualitatively similar at otherscalp locations ( Figure S2 ).
While we contend that the improved performance of the FS
model is evidence for the encoding of both low-level acousticvariations and higher-level phonetic features, it remained
possible that this result was driven by the FSmodel having
more free parameters than the other models. We sought to testwhether or not this was the case by investigating the performance
of several other high-dimensional models. Combining Phand
Sgram did not outperform the FSmodel (p > 0.05), even though
it has 16 additional dimensions. Also, combining the Phand
Feamodels did not outperform either the PhorFeamodels alone
(p > 0.05). These results suggest that the greater number ofparameters in the FSmodel does not explain our ﬁnding.
However, to further establish the validity of our interpretation,
we performed the same analyses on the data from the subjects
who listened to time-reversed speech. Because the samespeech segments were used, the same Env,Sgram ,Ph,Fea,
and FSmodels could be used in a time-reversed fashion. The
key manipulation here is that time-reversed speech has the
Figure 2. EEG Responses to Forward
Speech, but Not Time-Reversed Speech,Are Best Predicted When Speech Is Repre-sented as a Combination of Spectrotempo-ral Features and Phonetic-Feature Labels
(A) Grand-average EEG prediction correlations
(Pearson’s r) for each speech model (mean ±SEM). While there is no statistical difference inprediction performance between the spectrogram(Sgram ), phonetic-features ( Fea), and phonemic
(Ph) models (p > 0.05), all of these models are
better predictors of the EEG than that based onthe envelope ( Env;:p < 0.01). Importantly, the
model based on the combination of phoneticfeatures and spectrogram ( FS) outperforms all
other models (*p < 0.01).
(B) Correlation values between recorded EEG and
that predicted by each mTRF model for individualsubjects. The subjects are sorted according to theprediction correlations of the FSmodel. Although
the results show variability across subjects, the FS
model outperforms all the other models for everysubject. The model based on the speech envelope(Env) performs worse than every other model for
every subject.(C) Grand-average EEG prediction correlations forthe time-reversed speech condition (mean ±SEM). Prediction correlations using the modelbased on the envelope ( Env) are lower than those
for all other models ( :p < 0.05). As with normal speech, there is no statistical difference in prediction performance between the spectrogram ( Sgram ), phonetic-
features ( Fea), and phonemic ( Ph) models (p > 0.05). Importantly in this case, there is also no difference between the performance of those models and that
based on the combination of phonetic features and spectrogram ( FS; p > 0.05).
(D) Correlation values between recorded EEG and that predicted by each mTRF model for individual subjects for time-reversed speech. The subjects are sorted
according to the prediction correlations of the FSmodel. The model based on the speech envelope ( Env) performs worse than every other model for every subject.
Current Biology 25, 2457–2465, October 5, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 2459
same long-term amplitude spectrum as natural speech but is not
perceived as intelligible speech. Overall, the prediction values
were lower than for forward speech, likely as a result of differ-ences in top-down attention and also consistent with previous
research showing weaker neural entrainment to unintelligible
speech [ 20]. However, crucially, whereas the Envmodel again
performed more poorly than the others (p < 0.05), the FSmodel
in this case showed no improvement over the Sgram ,Ph,o rFea
models (p > 0.05; Figures 2 C and 2D). This supports our conten-
tion that the FSmodel in the case of forward speech indexes the
neural processing of speech features at the level of phonemes.
Phonetic Processing across Different EEG Frequency
Bands
Given previous research positing different functional roles in
speech processing for different cortical oscillations [ 27] and in
particular differential encoding of speech features by delta-
and theta-band entrainment [ 19], we examined the improved
model performances for different frequency bands. Phoneme-level processing (i.e., FSoutperforming all other models) was
evident only in the delta and theta bands ( Figure 3 ). The Ph
and Fea models outperformed the Sgram model for the delta
band while the Sgram model outperformed the Phand Fea
models for the alpha, beta, and low-gamma bands, possibly
evincing the differential sensitivity of these bands to detailed
acoustic information ( Sgram ) and categorical phonemic pro-cessing ( Phand Fea). Relative model performances in the theta
band are qualitatively similar to the results obtained above with
the broadband (1–15 Hz) signal. EEG prediction scores arevery low for beta and low gamma, in keeping with the generally
low signal-to-noise ratio for EEG at these frequencies. Given
the higher prediction scores for delta, theta, and alpha andthe phonetic processing effects visible using the broadband(1–15 Hz) EEG signal, we continue to analyze this broader repre-
sentation of the EEG in the following section.
Insights into Hierarchical Speech Encoding Based on
Multivariate Temporal Response Functions
Examination of the various mTRFs gives insight into the factorsdriving the performance of each model. Contrasting the Env
model ( Figure 4 A) with the Sgram model ( Figure 4 B) explains
why the former leads to poorer prediction, as it discards a wealthof response variability across frequency by reducing the speech
signal to a scalar value.
ThePhmTRF shows variable dynamics across phonemes ( Fig-
ure 4 C). To reveal groups of phonemes with similar responses, we
performed hierarchical clustering on the PhmTRFs at the 12 elec-
trodes of interest (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures ).
In doing so, we found that the model could accurately discrimi-nate consonants and vowels (32 of 35 phonemes classiﬁed
correctly). For visualization purposes ( Figure 4 C), we present
the phonemes grouped as vowels, diphthongs, semi-vowels,
Figure 3. EEG Response Prediction for Different EEG Frequency Bands
Grand-average EEG prediction correlations (Pearson’s r) for each speech model (mean ± SEM) for delta (A), theta (B), alpha (C), beta (D), and low-gamm a (E) EEG
frequencies. * indicates prediction differences at the level of p < 0.05 and ** at the level of p < 0.01, both using planned paired t tests.
2460 Current Biology 25, 2457–2465, October 5, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
and consonants, and we sort within each group according to the
hierarchical clustering distances. It can be seen that the mTRFsfor consonants show activation by around 50 ms, while those
for vowels do not generally show a signiﬁcant response before
/C24100 ms. In contrast to these early differences, all phonemes
show a similar response between /C24150 and 200 ms. This timing
pattern is consistent with previous research showing that acous-
tic-phonetic features of speech modulate activity in non-primary
auditory cortex from 50–100 ms onward, with language-speciﬁcphonetic-phonological analysis starting by 100–200 ms [ 10].
Interestingly, in the case of time-reversed speech, the PhmTRF
amplitude is noticeably lower than for forward speech, particu-larly during the 150–200 ms interval ( Figure S3 ).
When considering the mTRF for the Feamodel, it should be
remembered that each phoneme is simply a combination ofphonetic features. Indeed, a linear mapping from the Fea
mTRF to the phonemic space produced a model that is highly
correlated with the Phmodel (r = 0.93, p = 1.6 310
/C05; two-
tailed t test). We therefore consider these two models to beessentially equivalent. However, while the mTRF for the Ph
model highlights differences between vowels and consonants,
the mTRF for the Fea model allows us to visualize sensitivity
to different articulatory speech features ( Figure 4 D). Again,
the vowels stand out strongly from the features associated
with consonants. But within each of the consonant-related fea-tures, a considerable degree of variability is evident across the
speciﬁc distinctions.
Sensitivity of EEG to Phonetic Features as a Function of
LatencyWe wished to test the hypothesis that the sensitivity of our neuralresponses to different acoustic and phonetic features would in-
crease as a function of response latency in line with what one
might expect of a hierarchical system. To do this, we appliedunsupervised multi-dimensional scaling (see Experimental Pro-
cedures ) to the mTRFs in the time intervals 50–100 ms, 100–
150 ms, and 150–200 ms, which correspond approximately tothe three main peaks in the PhmTRF ( Figure 4 C). This approach
allowed us to build a geometric space in which the Euclidean dis-
tance between phonemes (or phonetic features) corresponds tothe similarity of their neural responses. Furthermore, this allowed
us to examine how sensitive the neural responses were to
different phonetic features by quantifying how well the re-sponses clustered according to the different groups of phoneticfeatures that produced them. We did this by performing k-means
clustering, where k is the number of groups under consideration,
and then calculating the corresponding F-scores (the harmonicmean of precision and recall) between the actual grouping and
the result of the clustering (see Supplemental Experimental Pro-
cedures ). All statistical tests were performed using a jackknifed
Figure 4. mTRF Models for Natural Speech Reﬂect Sensitivity to Different Speech Features
mTRFs plotted for envelope ( Env, A), spectrogram ( Sgram , B), phonemic ( Ph, C), and phonetic-features ( Fea, D) models at peri-stimulus time lags from /C0100 to
400 ms for natural speech, averaged over 12 frontotemporal electrodes (see Figure S1 ). The phonemes were sorted based on a hierarchical clustering analysis on
the average mTRF after grouping them into vowels, diphthongs, semi-vowels, and consonants. Horizontal dashed lines separate distinct categories o f phonemes
and phonetic features.
Current Biology 25, 2457–2465, October 5, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 2461
one-way repeated-measures ANOVA with a Greenhouse-
Geisser correction if the assumption of sphericity was not met.
The increasing F-scores as a function of latency for the Ph
mTRF show that the responses become more discriminative be-
tween consonants and non-consonants at longer latencies
(F(2.0, 18.0) = 3 3109, p < 0.0005; Figure 5 A). Similarly, the
F-scores for the Fea mTRF show that the responses become
more sensitive to different groups of phonetic features as a func-
tion of latency (F(1.3, 11.4) = 105, p < 0.0005; Figure 5 B). Again, itcan be seen that responses to vowels are clearly separable from
those to consonant-related features at longer latencies. Analysiswithin each phonetic-feature group revealed no sensitivity in ourmTRFs for place of articulation, for voicing, or for different vowels
(data not shown). However, the mTRFs did discriminate manner
of articulation ( Figure 5 C), especially at longer latencies (F(2.0,
18.0) = 215.0, p < 0.0005). These results show that noninvasive
neural responses to speech are sensitive to speciﬁc phonetic fea-
tures and that this sensitivity increases as a function of latency.
Figure 5. Sensitivity of EEG to Speech Features Increases with Response Latency
Multidimensional scaling (MDS) on the phonetic-features and phonemic mTRFs as a function of peri-stimulus time lag. By carrying out repeated k-mean s
classiﬁcation, we derive F-score measures that represent the discriminability of our mTRFs in each of the three time intervals 50–100 ms, 100–150 ms, and 150–
200 ms, which correspond approximately to the three main peaks and troughs of the phonemic mTRF ( Figure 3 C).
(A) MDS on the phonetic-features mTRF. The F-scores indicate the differential sensitivity of responses to manner of articulation, voicing, backnes s of a vowel, and
place of articulation features. These F-scores show signiﬁcant increase with response latency.(B) MDS on the phoneme mTRF. The F-scores are a measure of the binary classiﬁcation of responses to consonants and non-consonants (vowels, diphthongs ,
and semi-vowels), which, again, signiﬁcantly increase with latency. Although the classiﬁcation performed was binary, the distinction between the four main
classes of phonemes is evident.
(C) MDS on the phoneme mTRF. Here the F-scores are computed for the four classes: plosive, liquid & glide, nasal, and fricative & affricate. The four cat egories
are progressively more separable across the three time intervals (jackknife method, p < 0.0005).
2462 Current Biology 25, 2457–2465, October 5, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
The lack of response sensitivity to different speciﬁc vowels
above, combined with the high degree of discriminability be-
tween vowels and consonants, caused us to wonder whether
our model performance ( Figure 2 A) was mostly driven by this be-
tween-class response sensitivity. We tested this by randomly re-
labeling the consonants in our time-aligned phoneme model ( Ph)
with other consonants and by relabeling the vowels withrandomly chosen vowels. This led to a marked drop in EEG pre-diction performance (mean ± SD, r = 0.0247 ± 0.0009, shufﬂed
over 50 randomly relabeled versions of the stimulus, compared
with 0.0635 for the correct Phlabeling). This suggests that while
the neural responses strongly discriminate between vowels and
consonants, the data are also sensitive to differences within
these two classes.
Finally, we repeated the above analyses for the time-reversed
speech ( Figure S4 ). In this case, consonants and non-conso-
nants could still be discriminated in the PhmTRF (F(1.1,
20.3) = 42.9, p < 0.0005). In addition, phonetic features (F(1.3,23.1) = 148.0, p < 0.0005) and manner of articulation (F(2.0,
36.0) = 147.7, p < 0.0005) could also be discriminated. However,
importantly, unlike for forward speech, there was no signiﬁcantrelationship between discriminability and latency for either
phonetic features (F(1.3, 11.6) = 0.1, p = 0.79) or manner of artic-
ulation (F(2.0, 18.0) = 0.46, p = 0.64), and discriminability for con-sonants and non-consonants did not monotonically increase
with latency.
DISCUSSION
For humans to successfully process natural speech, they must
parse complex and variable acoustic inputs into categorical units
and correctly encode those units as particular phonemes [ 4].
Here, in the context of natural speech, we have shown thatlow-frequency, noninvasively recorded EEG indexes this cate-
gorical phoneme-level processing. Furthermore, we have shown
that the articulatory features of speech can best be discriminatedby responses at longer latencies, in line with what one might
expect of a hierarchical system.
Our ﬁndings have important implications for current theories
on cortical entrainment to the envelope of speech [ 11, 14,
19, 27 ]. In particular, we have shown that the processing of
different speech features that covary with the envelope can be
dissociated according to the neural responses they elicit. There-fore, neural measures based on the envelope alone are likely to
include contributions from neural populations at different levels
of the speech processing hierarchy. Given the relatively modestdifference in modeling performance between our FSand Sgram
models, it is entirely possible that the speech-speciﬁc contribu-
tion to measures of cortical entrainment is relatively small incomparison to the more general response to the stimulus acous-
tics. One brain region that could be responsible for such a
contribution is the superior temporal sulcus (STS). It has beensuggested that STS is involved in phonological-level processingbilaterally [ 28], a ﬁnding that ﬁts with the lack of any lateralization
effects in our prediction performances ( Figures S1 andS2). While
this region has been implicated in many other cognitive domains[29], recent neuroimaging work has suggested that it may repre-
sent a special locus of speech analysis that is distinct from
lexical, semantic, or syntactic processes [ 30]. The notion thatspeech-speciﬁc effects in EEG may derive from a relatively small
contribution from a speciﬁc brain region such as STS would
partly explain why it has been so difﬁcult to deﬁnitively say
whether envelope entrainment measures reﬂect anything morethan low-level processing of the acoustics of speech [ 19].
Recently it has been suggested that there may be different
functional roles for entrainment at different frequencies, withtheta-band entrainment (4–8 Hz) encoding speech features crit-ical for intelligibility and delta-band entrainment (1–4 Hz) being
related to the perceived, non-speech-speciﬁc acoustic rhythm
[19]. Our ﬁnding that FSoutperforms all other models for delta
and theta bands ( Figure 3 ) suggests that both of these bands
may reﬂect speech-speciﬁc processing. One attempt to recon-
cile these views is to suggest that relying on envelope trackingas a dependent measure, particularly for delta band where it per-
forms poorly, results in a lower sensitivity to subtle speech-spe-
ciﬁc effects. While we have argued that these speech-speciﬁceffects can be seen by comparing FSandSgram performances,
it is also worth noting how the Sgram and Phmodel perfor-
mances differentially vary across frequency bands (e.g.,
compare the relative model performances for delta and alpha).This variation potentially provides another way to disambiguate
lower- and higher-level speech processing effects, something
we will investigate in future work.
Our ﬁndings align well with recent invasive ECoG research
investigating the encoding of natural speech in the human brain
[4, 8]. Speciﬁcally, based on recordings from the superior tempo-
ral gyrus (STG) in epilepsy patients, high gamma frequency (75–
150 Hz) activity was shown to encode an acoustic-phonetic
representation of speech. Based on this, it has been suggestedthat the STG may be a transitional stage in the auditory process-ing hierarchy, early enough to still encode the acoustic features
of speech but high enough to exhibit response selectivity to
complex spectrotemporal patterns [ 31]. The fact that the ECoG
recordings were shown to be optimally sensitive to intermediate
acoustic-phonetic speech features at an intermediate response
time lag of around 150 ms [ 8] agrees reasonably well with the
increased discriminative power of our EEG responses at this
latency. While we have speculated that our ﬁndings may have
speciﬁc contributions from STS, the concordance with ECoGfrom STG suggests that the analysis framework we have outlinedmay represent an important mechanism for applying ﬁndings
from the ECoG community into research with a wider variety of
subjects including infants [ 32], children with developmental difﬁ-
culties [ 33], the elderly [ 34], and patients with psychiatric disor-
ders [ 35]. This is particularly important because much of the
EEG/MEG research in these cohorts relies on stimuli composedof discrete syllables, leading to a literature that is limited in what it
can say about the parsing and processing of continuous speech
(e.g., [ 32]).
Developing further insights using our approach would beneﬁt
from an ability to disentangle the activity from the many neural
sources that are concurrently active during speech processing.Although this issue is often seen as a shortcoming of EEG andMEG, it can also be seen as a strength in terms of the global
view of hierarchical processing that these methods provide.
But it will still be necessary to further characterize how differentspeech representations map to different neural responses and to
determine which speciﬁc neural populations are responsible for
Current Biology 25, 2457–2465, October 5, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 2463
those responses. Furthermore, it will be necessary to disen-
tangle how much the cortical entrainment of speech is driven
by additive evoked activity and how much by the entrainment
of ongoing oscillations [ 9, 27, 36 ]. One potentially fruitful
approach to address these questions is to manipulate the rela-
tive amount of low- and high-level information that is available
in the speech stimuli, with a view toward disambiguating the in-formation contained within our Sgram andPhmodels (e.g., [ 37]).
Indeed, this is already possible to an extent by considering the
difference between the FSand Sgram model performances,
which we contend is likely to reﬂect phoneme-level processingin relative isolation. Importantly, this difference was positive for
each and every subject. As such, it has the potential to act as
a dependent measure in research aimed at understandingspeech processing in particular populations. The sensitivity of
response functions to different phonetic features and how that
sensitivity varies with latency also represent potentially usefuldependent measures of speech-speciﬁc processing.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
All experimental procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of the
School of Psychology at Trinity College Dublin. In the ﬁrst experiment, ten sub-jects undertook 28 trials, each of /C24155 s in length, in which they were pre-
sented with an audiobook version of a classic work of ﬁction read by a maleAmerican English speaker. The second experiment involved the presentationof the same trials in the same order, but with each of the 28 speech stimuliplayed in reverse. All stimuli were presented monophonically using head-phones in a dark room while subjects ﬁxated on a crosshair centered on ascreen. High-density EEG was recorded and digitally ﬁltered between 1 and15 Hz and referenced to the average of the two mastoid channels. Linearregression was used to determine multivariate temporal response functions(mTRFs) describing a mapping between the EEG and ﬁve speech representa-tions. The broadband amplitude envelope representation ( Env) was calculated
using the Hilbert transform. The spectrogram representation ( Sgram ) was ob-
tained by ﬁrst ﬁltering the speech stimulus into 16 frequency bands between250 Hz and 8 kHz and then using the Hilbert transform to compute the ampli-
tude envelope for each band. The phoneme representation ( Ph) was computed
using the forced-alignment software Prosodylab-Aligner [ 38], which returns
the starting and ending time points for each phoneme. This representationwas a multivariate time series composed of mutually exclusive binary arrays(one for each phoneme). The average acoustic envelope produced by thisalignment can be seen in Figure S5 . The phonetic-features representation
was obtained through a linear mapping of the phonemic representation intoa space of 19 features [ 8], which are a distinctive subset of those deﬁned by
Chomsky and Halle [ 25] to describe the articulatory and acoustic properties
of the phonetic content of speech. Finally, we propose a model that combinesFeaandSgram (FS), which was obtained by concatenating FeaandSgram into
a single matrix.
The sensitivity of EEG to different speech features was assessed by using
leave-one-out cross-validation to see how well each model could predictEEG data, as indexed by Pearson’s correlation. This was done using mTRFscomputed over a range of time lags from 0 to 250 ms, as no visible responsewas present outside this range. While this was done for all electrodes, wefocused our analysis on a set of 12 electrodes from the two areas of the scalp
with the highest prediction correlations (six symmetric pairs on the left and
right scalp; see Supplemental Experimental Procedures for more details),
without biasing any of the mTRF models. This subset of electrodes wasused to obtain the prediction correlations presented in Figures 2 and 3. The
average of the mTRFs across these 12 electrodes is presented in Figures 4
andS3. To examine the dissimilarity of neural responses to different speech
tokens, a multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) analysis was applied to thephonemic and phonetic-features mTRF models on all 12 of these channelscollectively (i.e., without averaging; Figures 5 and S4). Similar to previous
research [ 4], we employed a non-metric MDS that minimizes the reconstruc-tion error measured by Kruskal stress [ 39]. The MDS was calculated in ﬁve
dimensions (eigenvariates), which was enough to allow the reconstruction ofthe original dissimilarities with an accuracy in excess of 90% in all cases(stress%0.1) [ 39]. 100 repetitions of k-means unsupervised classiﬁcation
with prior knowledge of the number of classes k [ 40] was performed to
classify phonemes and phonetic features. For each repetition, this wasperformed based on the phonemic or phonetic-features mTRF model at allelectrodes of interest for every subject. Sensitivity to different phonemesand features was quantiﬁed by calculating F-scores on the output of thek-means clustering [ 41]. The values reported in Figures 5 andS4are the aver-
ages of these repetitions.
A more detailed description of the subjects, data collection, and analysis
can be found in the Supplemental Information .
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes ﬁve ﬁgures and Supplemental Experi-
mental Procedures and can be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.08.030 .
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The study was conceived and the experiments were designed by E.C.L.
G.M.D.L. programmed the tasks and collected the data. G.M.D.L. andJ.A.O. analyzed the data. E.C.L., G.M.D.L., and J.A.O. wrote the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by a grant from Science Foundation Ireland
(09-RFP-NES2382) and by an Irish Research Council Government of IrelandPostgraduate Scholarship. The authors thank S. Shamma, N. Mesgarani,J. Butler, S. Kelly, J. Murphy, M. Crosse, and G. Loughnane for useful discus-sions and comments on the manuscript.
Received: May 14, 2015
Revised: July 27, 2015Accepted: August 13, 2015Published: September 24, 2015
REFERENCES
1.
Poeppel, D. (2014). The neuroanatomic and neurophysiological infrastruc-
ture for speech and language. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 28, 142–149 .
2.Okada, K., Rong, F., Venezia, J., Matchin, W., Hsieh, I.H., Saberi, K.,
Serences, J.T., and Hickok, G. (2010). Hierarchical organization of humanauditory cortex: evidence from acoustic invariance in the response to intel-ligible speech. Cereb. Cortex 20, 2486–2495 .
3.Peelle, J.E., Johnsrude, I.S., and Davis, M.H. (2010). Hierarchical process-
ing for speech in human auditory cortex and beyond. Front. Hum.Neurosci. 4,5 1.
4.Chang, E.F., Rieger, J.W., Johnson, K., Berger, M.S., Barbaro, N.M., and
Knight, R.T. (2010). Categorical speech representation in human superiortemporal gyrus. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 1428–1432 .
5.DeWitt, I., and Rauschecker, J.P. (2012). Phoneme and word recognition
in the auditory ventral stream. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, E505–E514 .
6.Obleser, J., Zimmermann, J., Van Meter, J., and Rauschecker, J.P. (2007).
Multiple stages of auditory speech perception reﬂected in event-relatedFMRI. Cereb. Cortex 17, 2251–2257 .
7.Rauschecker, J.P., and Scott, S.K. (2009). Maps and streams in the audi-
tory cortex: nonhuman primates illuminate human speech processing.Nat. Neurosci. 12, 718–724 .
8.Mesgarani, N., Cheung, C., Johnson, K., and Chang, E.F. (2014). Phonetic
feature encoding in human superior temporal gyrus. Science 343, 1006–
1010 .
9.Zion Golumbic, E.M., Ding, N., Bickel, S., Lakatos, P., Schevon, C.A.,
McKhann, G.M., Goodman, R.R., Emerson, R., Mehta, A.D., Simon,
2464 Current Biology 25, 2457–2465, October 5, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
J.Z., et al. (2013). Mechanisms underlying selective neuronal tracking of
attended speech at a ‘‘cocktail party’’. Neuron 77, 980–991 .
10.Salmelin, R. (2007). Clinical neurophysiology of language: the MEG
approach. Clin. Neurophysiol. 118, 237–254 .
11.Aiken, S.J., and Picton, T.W. (2008). Human cortical responses to the
speech envelope. Ear Hear. 29, 139–157 .
12.Lalor, E.C., and Foxe, J.J. (2010). Neural responses to uninterrupted nat-
ural speech can be extracted with precise temporal resolution. Eur. J.Neurosci. 31, 189–193 .
13.Ding, N., and Simon, J.Z. (2012). Emergence of neural encoding of audi-
tory objects while listening to competing speakers. Proc. Natl. Acad.Sci. USA 109, 11854–11859 .
14.Luo, H., and Poeppel, D. (2007). Phase patterns of neuronal responses
reliably discriminate speech in human auditory cortex. Neuron 54, 1001–
1010 .
15.Power, A.J., Foxe, J.J., Forde, E.J., Reilly, R.B., and Lalor, E.C. (2012). At
what time is the cocktail party? A late locus of selective attention to naturalspeech. Eur. J. Neurosci. 35, 1497–1503 .
16.Kerlin, J.R., Shahin, A.J., and Miller, L.M. (2010). Attentional gain control of
ongoing cortical speech representations in a ‘‘cocktail party’’. J. Neurosci.30, 620–628 .
17.Zion Golumbic, E., Cogan, G.B., Schroeder, C.E., and Poeppel, D. (2013).
Visual input enhances selective speech envelope tracking in auditory cor-tex at a ‘‘cocktail party’’. J. Neurosci. 33, 1417–1426 .
18.Luo, H., Liu, Z., and Poeppel, D. (2010). Auditory cortex tracks both audi-
tory and visual stimulus dynamics using low-frequency neuronal phasemodulation. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000445 .
19.Ding, N., and Simon, J.Z. (2014). Cortical entrainment to continuous
speech: functional roles and interpretations. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8,3 1 1 .
20.Peelle, J.E., Gross, J., and Davis, M.H. (2013). Phase-locked responses to
speech in human auditory cortex are enhanced during comprehension.Cereb. Cortex 23, 1378–1387 .
21.Howard, M.F., and Poeppel, D. (2010). Discrimination of speech stimuli
based on neuronal response phase patterns depends on acoustics butnot comprehension. J. Neurophysiol. 104, 2500–2511 .
22.Gross, J., Hoogenboom, N., Thut, G., Schyns, P., Panzeri, S., Belin, P.,
and Garrod, S. (2013). Speech rhythms and multiplexed oscillatory sen-sory coding in the human brain. PLoS Biol. 11, e1001752 .
23.Ding, N., and Simon, J.Z. (2012). Neural coding of continuous speech in
auditory cortex during monaural and dichotic listening. J. Neurophysiol.107, 78–89 .
24.Pasley, B.N., David, S.V., Mesgarani, N., Flinker, A., Shamma, S.A., Crone,
N.E., Knight, R.T., and Chang, E.F. (2012). Reconstructing speech fromhuman auditory cortex. PLoS Biol. 10, e1001251 .25.Chomsky, N., and Halle, M. (1968). The Sound Pattern of English (Harper &
Row) .
26.Ding, N., Chatterjee, M., and Simon, J.Z. (2013). Robust cortical entrain-
ment to the speech envelope relies on the spectro-temporal ﬁne structure.
Neuroimage 88C, 41–46 .
27.Giraud, A.L., and Poeppel, D. (2012). Cortical oscillations and speech
processing: emerging computational principles and operations. Nat.Neurosci. 15, 511–517 .
28.Hickok, G., and Poeppel, D. (2007). The cortical organization of speech
processing. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 393–402 .
29.Hein, G., and Knight, R.T. (2008). Superior temporal sulcus–It’s my area: or
is it? J. Cogn. Neurosci. 20, 2125–2136 .
30.Overath, T., McDermott, J.H., Zarate, J.M., and Poeppel, D. (2015). The
cortical analysis of speech-speciﬁc temporal structure revealed by re-sponses to sound quilts. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 903–911 .
31.Shamma, S. (2014). How phonetically selective is the human auditory cor-
tex? Trends Cogn. Sci. 18, 391–392 .
32.Kuhl, P.K. (2010). Brain mechanisms in early language acquisition. Neuron
67, 713–727 .
33.Gervais, H., Belin, P., Boddaert, N., Leboyer, M., Coez, A., Sfaello, I.,
Barthe ´le´my, C., Brunelle, F., Samson, Y., and Zilbovicius, M. (2004).
Abnormal cortical voice processing in autism. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 801–802 .
34.Ruggles, D., Bharadwaj, H., and Shinn-Cunningham, B.G. (2012). Why
middle-aged listeners have trouble hearing in everyday settings. Curr.Biol. 22, 1417–1422 .
35.Li, X., Branch, C.A., and DeLisi, L.E. (2009). Language pathway abnormal-
ities in schizophrenia: a review of fMRI and other imaging studies. Curr.Opin. Psychiatry 22, 131–139 .
36.Schroeder, C.E., and Lakatos, P. (2009). Low-frequency neuronal oscilla-
tions as instruments of sensory selection. Trends Neurosci. 32, 9–18 .
37.Zoefel, B., and VanRullen, R. (2015). Selective perceptual phase entrain-
ment to speech rhythm in the absence of spectral energy ﬂuctuations.J. Neurosci. 35, 1954–1964 .
38.Gorman, K., Howell, J., and Wagner, M. (2011). Prosodylab-Aligner: A tool
for forced alignment of laboratory speech. Can. Acoust. 39, 192–193 .
39.Kruskal, J.B., and Wish, M. (1978). Multidimensional Scaling (Sage
Publications) .
40.MacQueen, J. (1967). Some methods for classiﬁcation and analysis of
multivariate observations. In Proceedings of the Fifth BerkeleySymposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Volume I:
Theory of Statistics , L. Lecam, and J. Neyman, eds. (University of
California Press), pp. 281–297 .
41.Rijsbergen, C.J.V. (1979). Information Retrieval (Butterworth-Heinemann) .
Current Biology 25, 2457–2465, October 5, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 2465
